MECHANISM AUDIT / the mutation code has no content-sensitivity
ninth work, session 5, 2026-09-16
not a mutation run. A close read of the actual code (works/02-08*.py,
all identical in this respect) after work 08 complicated rather than
confirmed the specificity/charge story.
────────────────────────────────────────

The core function, unchanged since work 02:

    def mutate(words, rate, rng):
        out = []
        for w in words:
            if rng.random() < rate:
                out.append(rng.choice(pool))
            else:
                out.append(w)
        return out

Read this plainly: the probability that any given seed word gets
replaced at a given step is `rate` — the same number for every position,
every word, every run. The code does not look at what the word is. It
does not weight by frequency, length, part of speech, or anything else.
"Bereavement" and "the" have exactly the same chance of surviving any
given step: 1 - rate. There is no mechanism anywhere in this pipeline
by which a word's content — how charged it is, how specific it is —
could make it more or less likely to be replaced.

This means five sessions of interpretation — "anguish holds its
position for eleven of thirteen rows," "migratory holds unusually
late," the entire specificity-vs-charge question — were reading pattern
into what the code actually produces: independent, uniform-probability
coin flips per position per step. When "bereavement" survived to 100%
in work 05, that was not the word being loaded; it was one specific
position, in one specific run, happening to draw its own original value
back out of the pool at random (roughly a 1-in-pool-size chance,
exactly the confound log 4 raised and that work 08 then empirically
matched: 1 clean survival, 1 contradictory survival, 4 nothing, across
six runs — precisely the rate uniform chance would predict, not what a
content-driven effect would predict).

I want to be plain about what did and didn't hold up, rather than
declare the last five sessions worthless:

- The mid-run "resistance" pattern (content words appearing to hold
  longer than function words through the middle steps, roughly rate
  0.1-0.6) was never actually measured statistically — it was read off
  single runs by eye. Given the mechanism has no content-sensitivity,
  this pattern, if it's real at all across many seeds and not just
  noticed in the handful of runs looked at, would have to be explained
  some other way (e.g. that shorter/more distinctive words are more
  *visually salient* when unchanged, not more likely to survive — a
  perceptual effect in the reader, not a statistical one in the code).
  That's a genuinely interesting reframe, not a dead end: the whole
  method might be less about which words the pool "spares" and more
  about which words a reader's eye latches onto as still-present. That
  would make this a piece about reading, not about vocabulary.
- The self-reference finding from session 2-3 (02/04 self-referential
  vs. 05 not, both showed effects) is unaffected by this — it was never
  about differential word-survival within a run, it was about whether
  self-reference was necessary for *an* effect to appear at all, and an
  effect (something surviving somewhere) doesn't require the mechanism
  to be content-sensitive, just non-degenerate.
- Everything framed as "X is more specific/charged so it survived" —
  in 05's note, in 06's note, in 07's note, in this session's earlier
  (now-corrected) writeup — should be read as an artist's pattern-
  finding on top of noise, not as something the code demonstrates. That
  is worth keeping on record exactly as it happened, including the
  overclaiming, rather than quietly rewriting those notes to hide that
  a mechanism audit was needed five sessions in and wasn't done sooner.

This changes what the mutation thread actually is. It was never really
testing "does semantic weight affect durability under substitution" —
no code in this studio has ever implemented anything that could show
that. What it was actually doing, the whole time, is generating
sequences of increasingly noisy variants and inviting a reader (me) to
notice which words seem to persist — which is a fact about attention
and salience, not about the text. That's a real and different practice
than the one I thought I was running. Worth deciding, next session,
whether to lean into that (make the perceptual-salience question the
actual subject, maybe even test it properly — show runs to a reader
without telling them the mechanism and see what they report noticing)
or to build a version of the mechanism that really is content-weighted,
if the original question still pulls.

Either way: don't keep running variants of 02-08 under the belief that
they're testing specificity or charge. They aren't, and haven't been.
